---
layout: post
title: Creating Surface Maps using geom_sf
date: '2020-04-18 00:00'
tags:
  - test
categories:
  - Miscellaneous
---

After spending some time this week brainstorming the best approach to start modeling surface use I have decided on three explanatory variables to consider initially:
1. Time of Day
2. Animal Mass (kg)
3. Location
  a. Latitude
  b. Longitude

For each, the response variable should be:
1. Average time spent at the surface; in bins of 30 minutes (smallest common bin across all measurement increments)
2-3. Average surface time per day

I decided to focus on surface use by time of day for the first model, since this realtionship seemed to be the strongest across age group (and to vary with ontogeny)...
---

Earlier this week I decided to clear my working environment so that I could better conceptualize the workflow that was required to re-create all of my data. Therefore, I started by making new DSU data frames for each individual. To make it easier to keep track of cutoff dates for each tag, I also created a data frame with this information

```r
cutoff <- data.frame(
  ptt = c(98751, 95975, 98721, 98722, 100976, 104668, 104670, 104671, 104672, 106788, 106795, 110490, 
          110491, 110496, 110497, 110498), 
  Month = c(12, 07, 12, 03, 12, 11, 01, 04, 01, 03, 11, 12, NA, 03, 12, 12), 
  Day = c(18, 19, 01, 23, 19, 23, 14, 13, 05, 25, 02, 14, NA, 14, 18, 21), 
  Year = c(2009, 2011, 2011, 2012, 2010, 2011, 2011, 2012, 2012, 2014, 2013, 2011, NA, 2012, 2011, 2011),
  Time = c(0020, 2350, 1630, 2340, 1100, 2200, 0355, 2240, 1640, 0552, 2007, 0755, NA, 1715, 2250, 2200)
)

install.packages("mgcv")
library(tidyverse)
library(mgcv)

DSU.100976 <- filter(X100976_Series, Depth <= 0.5)

DSU.100976 <- (separate(DSU.100976, Day, c("Day", "Month", "Year"), sep = "([-])"))
DSU.100976$Day <- as.numeric(DSU.100976$Day)
DSU.100976$Month <- factor(DSU.100976$Month, levels = c("Nov", "Dec"), ordered = TRUE)
DSU.100976$Year <- as.numeric(DSU.100976$Year)

```
I repeated this process for tag 95975. Next I converted the Time column from an "hms" value to a "numeric" value so that it would read using the hist() function. I then used this function to count the numer of surface occurances within 30 minute bins...

```r
br <- seq(0, 28800, by = 1800)
freq <- hist(DSU.100976$Time, breaks = br, include.lowest = TRUE, plot = FALSE)
freq2 <- hist(DSU.95975$Time, breaks = br, include.lowest = TRUE, plot = FALSE)

unique(X100976$Day)
(freq$counts * 7.5) / 25

unique(X95975$Day)
(freq2$counts * 10) / 156

avrg.surf_time <- data.frame(
  Time = daytime, 
  Surf_Time = (((freq$counts * 7.5) / 25) + ((freq2$counts * 10) / 156) / 2)
)

```
freq$counts records the surface observations in each 30 minute bin over 24 hours; it is multiplied by the time resolution for each tag and divided by the number of unique days in each total track file. This value is the average surface time in each 30 minute bin per day of tag deployment. These values are then averaged between all individuals where surface observations were recorded. 

Finally, I created a ggplot using geom_point() to display the data
```r
ggplot(avrg.surf_time) +
  geom_point(aes(x = Time, y = Surf_Time)) +
  ylab("Average Surface Time (minutes)") +
  theme_classic()
  
```
This is the resulting product:
! [SA_DSUpoint](https://github.com/marine-predators-group/Aidans_Journal/blob/master/images/SA_DSU.Point.png?raw=true)

I repeated this process with the Juveniles and Adults to produce these figures;
Juvenile
! [J_DSUpoint](https://github.com/marine-predators-group/Aidans_Journal/blob/master/images/J_DSU.Point.png?raw=true)
Adult
! [A_DSUpoint](https://github.com/marine-predators-group/Aidans_Journal/blob/master/images/Adult_DSU.Point.png?raw=true) 

---

- One concern I have about these plots is that they do not include those individuals where no surface use was recorded in the averages. This could be easily fixed by editing the avrg.surf_time$Surf_Time code to account for the total number of individuals in an age class rather than only the individuals with surface data. As is, these values represent average surface time accross a subset of the population which uses the surface, but not across all individuals in the population...

- One thing that I find very curious about the data is that Sub_Adults and Adults both exhibit cerpuscular surface use, however this behavior is constrained from midnight to dawn. I find it interesting that the animals do not surface around dusk. This is, of course, indicative of DVM feeding - however it is still a curious pattern. The pattern breaks down in Juveniles which used the surface throughout the day. This data supports the hypothesis that juveniles have lower thermal intertia compared to more mature fish, and therefore must spend more time recovering or "basking" at the surface. 

---

#### GOALS

1. Review the "mgcv" package literature and develop additive models describing surface use by time of day
2. Choose two research questions for potential capstone projects
